From Hansel minutes.com Hansel minutes,
a weekly discussion with web
developer and technologist and Scott
Hanselman hosted by Carl Franklin. This
is Lawrence Ryan announcing show number
one 61 recorded live Friday,
May 8th, 2009. Support for Hanselman it's
just provided by teller. He
controls the most comprehensive suite
of components for windows forms
and asp.net web applications. online@wwwdotterikdotcomandby.net
developers journal the world's leading.net
developer magazine online at www
dot  dot com. In
this episode, Scott talks with
Mustang software founders, Jim Hare
and Scott Hunter. Hi, this is
Scott Hanselman and this is
another episode of Hansel minutes.
And today we're talking about
bulletin board systems and I've
got on the phone with
me, Jim Hare and Scott Hunter,
founding members of Mustang software.
And you might remember Wildcats
the Wildcat bulletin board system.
Thanks Jim and Scott for
sitting down with me today.
It's great to be here.
Thanks for inviting us. Hey
Scott, thanks for inviting us.
Yeah, absolutely. Jim, who was,
who, who, who started what,
and you were the CEO,
right? Yeah, I was the
original founder and CEO. I
kind of started Scott and
I met on CompuServe back
in, in 85 when we,
cause we both had PC
juniors and, and we kind
of started playing with the
idea of, could we write
a bulletin board system for
the, for the PC junior?
Cause everybody said it couldn't
be done because the, if
you remember way back then
the modem was a non
haze compatible modem back then.
And, and so we just
kinda did it as a,
as a project just to
see if we could write
a mini BBS. And then
I kinda got hooked into
the idea of learning how
to program and, and wanted
to learn how to program
turbo, Pascal. And, and so
kind of started on a
project to write a bulletin
board under turbo Pascal Kind
of funny if you go
back to that era, you
know, Jim and I both
have like 300 baud modems
and we both bought these
awful IBM computers called PC
juniors that were incompatible with
half the world, but they
were cheap and we're on
CompuServe, which was the big
dial up service before the
internet and asking, you know,
where can I find the
BBS that runs on this
thing and ran into a
character that had a turbo
Pascal bulletin board called Colossus.
And I think the guy
that worked on that with
him, Jim Plunkett, and I'd
met him and his BBS
did not work on the
PC junior, but I talked
to him and he's like,
Hey, I'll give you the
source code and you can
try to make this thing
work with the PC junior.
So I, I got the
source code for that and,
and started playing with triple
Pascal. This is like triple
Pascal, one or two, still
impressive. I think even today's
term to think that, you
know, those compilers back then,
you know, compiled in like
one second, you know, thousands
of lines we took, we
took Colossus and, and I
took it and played with
a little bit. And then
I I'd met Jim online,
a friend of ours, Don
Watkins, who ran some of
the forums on CompuServe. He
ran the PC SIG on,
on CompuServe, introduced Gemini to
each other. And next thing
I know I've got the
closet source code and I
throw it over to Jim
and Jim and I start
running this thing. And, and,
and that's when Jim had
the idea of, you know,
Colossus was, was kind of
stagnant. Wasn't going all the
directions we wanted. And, and
that's when Jim had the
idea of starting up his
own bulletin board. And I
remember I was at the
time Jim was in California,
I lived in little rock
Arkansas and, and he calls
me one night and we
had this huge brainstorming session
on the phone and, and
about how we would build
this thing and what databases
we would use and all
this stuff. And then, then
we don't talk for about
six months and then I'll,
I'll throw the bone back
over to Jim here. Cause
you know, during that six
months he was out there
going and cranking on, on
building the first cut of
well cap. Yeah, it was,
it was a kind of
a, an interesting time because
I didn't know how to
program. And obviously back then,
you know, there was no
courses on, on turbo Pascal
or anything like that. You
know, the schools were still
teaching Fortran and cobalt and
all those classes. So, you
know, you had to pretty
much learn how to program
out of a book. And,
and so I just started,
you know, I got all
the books I could on
turbo Pascal. And then I
met guys like John Freel
who were kind enough to
give me some of the
source code assembly source code
that had the communications layer
in it. At that point,
I went ahead and bought
a, a clone a PC
at the time. I think
one of the very first
ones that came out to
try to, you know, cause
the PC junior just wasn't
really getting it from that
standpoint. And, and, and then,
you know, met the guys
at turtle power. I remember
the guys at turtle power
Scott and, and, you know,
they kind of helped me
with some, you know, some
objects and, and functions and
procedures and just started really,
really just did it as
a labor of love just
to really learn how to
program and, and to, to
get it running. And, and
the first, I think BBS
we had was a what's
it called junior country or
something like that. And yeah,
it was, it was a
BBS that was running on
a clone PC, but, but
it had all of the,
every single kind of app
you could think of for
PC juniors and stuff. So,
and that's kinda how, how
everything kind of started. You
keep talking about getting help
from people you're doing this
online. This is 25 years
ago, three baud modem. And
You're logging into CompuServe talking
in the forums, asking questions
Yeah. And calling these other
people's DVS as well. So,
you know, John Freel, who
was the original author of
que modem had to BVS,
I don't know. I don't
remember how we ran into,
into the turbo power guys,
but it's kinda funny. And,
you know, especially with, with
me at Microsoft, Jim and
I Wildcat was one of
the first big applications that
was written on turbo Pascal,
which became Borland Pascal. And
so just like we have
insiders groups that come up
and talk to the, like
the asp.net team at Microsoft,
Jim and I were part
of that team for Berlin
and turbo Pascal. So while
we're building the early versions
of, of the, of the
BBS and stuff, we'd get
a call from Borland once
a year and we'd go
up there. And, and we
were actually at Andrews Helzberg
house cause he was throwing
these parties. You know, this
is the guy who created
triple Pascal and now is
the author of C-sharp and
link and right. And all
these and we were, we
were, we would go up
once a year, see what
the new Berlin Berlin technology
was going to be and
go have dinner at his
house. Wow. Was it like
an, it was a nice
house. Was he like a
superstar then He was a
superstar then. But I mean,
I, you know, I would
say that, you know, the
America as a whole is
kind of, you know, blown
up since then, I think,
you know, successful in 85
or 87 was not what
successful in 2005 was, you
know, it was moderate. It
was, it was nice. It
was in Scott's Valley. It
was all nice area and
stuff. You know, I, I
actually remember those, those trips,
you know, very vividly. And
what I thought was amazing
was I was always in
awe because, you know, here
I was meeting the guy
that wrote turtle Pascal, but
they were so personable. I
mean, they're so reachable and,
and you know, they just
love sitting down and talking
about stuff. And I just,
you know, I really was
just taken by the fact
that it was, you know,
the community was just willing
to share anything. I mean
just, you know, ideas, concepts,
you know, how to do
certain things. And, and, and
I think that's what attracted
me to the whole industry
in general was the fact
that I could get on
copy serve, or I copy
serve. I found out about
bulletin board systems and then
from bulletin board systems, I
found out about FIDOnet and
other things, and then started
really digging into this and
found that everybody I met
all the CIS ops that
I met were, you know,
were just willing and able
to share concepts, ideas and
everything. And I think, I
think that's, you know, that
was really the first social
network. I think that, that,
you know, really evolved. And
it was, it was because
we could sit in our,
you know, I could sit
in my home in Bakersfield,
California and use a modem
and connect to people around
the world. And, and I
think that's really was the
big attraction for me. Well,
let's back up a second
and give some of the
listeners, maybe some of the
younger listeners and some of
the international listeners, some of
the glossary of terms that
we've been banding around here.
So originally you were saying
In 1985, you were using
a 300 baud modem. I
think that's fair to say
that's a 300 BPS or
bits per second. That's 300
bits, right. In a second,
which is about 37 bytes
a second, which is a
N a K is a
thousand plus bites. This is
a pretty slow thing that
we're talking about. Yeah. When
you were, when you were
reading messages on a screen,
you could watch the screen
slowly paint itself, you know,
everybody's, it's almost like a
remote typewriter. Exactly. It was
like a remote typewriter. It's
like watching the movie war
games. When you see the
text growing across the computer
screens and stuff at a
really slow rate. I mean,
today we complain when our
browser doesn't draw like 30
pictures and everything in like
two seconds. And these days,
you know, you might wait
four or five seconds for
just text, no pictures, no
images at all. Just text
to come up here, put
that into the context of
a single K you know,
what we think of as
a very small unit, you're
looking at about 30 seconds
to get a thousand bytes.
Yes. You know, so then
you think about someone who
wants to send an image,
that's a big deal. Yeah.
And you know, and the
other thing about those times
is, you know, w we
used to at three, at
300 baud modem, we used
to say, would paint a
word. Then when we first
got the Hayes 1200 baud
modem switch, Scott and I
both paid over a thousand
bucks to get when they
first came out, we thought
that was amazing because it
painted a line, you know?
And then when then we
followed the whole thing, 2,400
bod, I never forget when
2,400 baud came out, haze,
2,400 baud modem. And then,
and then U S robotics
came out with the very
first, I remember anyways, 9,600
baud modem. And, and, you
know, so we, we followed
it all the way to,
you know, all the way
When there were standards Wars
that were happening. You know,
I remember that that was,
was like, who's going to
win. And then there was
a device that I think
I spent $300 for a,
what they were calling a
V dot everything, which was
just a modem that said,
whatever it is, we'll speak
it because we're not going
to fight. It was kind
of the equivalent of a
VHS and beta max player,
all in one thing. And
it was the size of
a modern laptop. The motor
Moore's are great for the
BBS community because we got
them almost for free because,
you know, the way, the
way that the modem things
worked, you know, if you
were sitting at home and
you wanted to call my
bulletin board, you'd want my
bulletin board to have the
fastest modem available. So if
you had a fast modem,
it would work. And so
Hayes and us robotics and
all these modem companies, man,
they would throw these modems
at us. The modem would
cost you if you were
an end user, the modem
brand new Mona might cost
like $1,100 for a 9,600
baud modem. But they were
giving them to CIS ops
or like a hundred dollars.
Basically. It probably had cost,
right. There were programs for
basically you register your bulletin
board. Right? Exactly. If we
don't run the fast modem,
then why would anybody buy
it? I mean, cause the
people that are connecting to
us, so it was, it
was a fun time from
that perspective as well. Cause
you know, we all the
new technology, if you were
often actually ran a BBS
full time and they did
do checks to make sure
you ran a BBS full
time. If you ran it
full time, you know, you've
got all that hardware for,
for cheap, maybe an obvious
word, but systems operator, the
person that owns the bulletin
board, That's correct. That's the,
that's the guy that's, he's
the in today's terms, he'd
be the webmaster. It'd be
the guy that's running the
site. And the other thing
that was interesting during that
time from a development point
of view from a programming
point of view was, you
know, I spent probably I'd
say 30% of my time
actually working on the communication
layers for every version of
Wildcat and the modem control
layer because you know, trying
to get the modem to
properly pickup automatically was, was
a constant fight for me
because you know, every single
modem member, we were selling
this as a software package
and people were using every
brand of modem that was
out there. And every brand
of modem had different timing
delays when they would send
a, you know, a, a
rain, you know, then I'd
have to send an ATA
to have an answer. And
the biggest problems with wild
cat in the early days
was just getting it to
work with all the modems
to automatically answer because there
was nothing worse than to
be a CIS op. And
to sit there, staring at
a screen, waiting for somebody
to call into your books
and board, and then, then
not have an answer the
phone. I mean, that was
just like, that was like
death. They finally get that
phone call to come in
and then for the thing
to not answer. And so
I spent countless hours on
working on the, on the,
on the communication layers to
make sure that Wildcat never
missed a call. And then
as BBSs gay started getting
busier, you, you had to
deal with, okay, now you
have to hang up on,
you know, the person hangs
up and now you have
to immediately reset and be
ready for the next car
or within, you know, a
second or two. So That
brings up a great point.
You know, Scott, Scott was
asking about what, you know,
what that means. And, and
that, that reminds me of
something you don't get today.
When you build a website
today, you know, when you
were a societ back in
these times, your computer typically
had one modem and could
only handle one phone call
at a time. In the
later days of the BBS
industry, there was ways to,
to have multi lines and
do more than that. But
early on, you really had
one line. And the cool
thing about being an assist
shop was you would sit
there and stare at your
computer. And it's sitting there
saying, waiting for a call.
And then as soon as
the phone rings, you know,
as Jim said, we do
all this handshaking and stuff
and we answered the phone.
And then as this, this
stuff, you've got to watch,
you got to watch everything
that person did on your
site. As, as they're typing
and stuff, you actually see
them, the menu withdrawn the
draw on the screen. You
can see them go from
menu to menu. You can
see them typing messages and
downloading files. And it, it
was, it was cool. I
mean, you know, today you
go look at a web
log. Ah, great. It showed
me that my homepage was
showed 3,500 times kind of
like screening your calls, right?
Someone calls your, your voice,
your you're not your voicemail.
So I was going to
say, voicemail, someone calls your
answering machine and you can
listen to them in real
talking. It's a certain voyeurism
they're being able to watch
people do that. Eventually though,
when bulletin boards became big
on messaging and people would
leave messages, I would turn
that feature off because I
don't want to watch someone
leaving messages, you know, as
soon as it got multiline,
it was impossible to do
that anyways, but it was
cool, especially in the early
days when it was really,
really community driven. If you
watch somebody's struggling on your
BBS, you would just press
a button on your, on
your keyboard and you could
write and interrupt them and
say, hi, it's me. I'm
the up? What can I
do to help? And then,
and then let's not forget,
let's not forget the coolness
of when companies like desqview
came out and all of
a sudden we could now,
you know, multitask on our
PCs. And then we had
to figure out ways to
put multiple modems in those
PCs and have multiple versions
of, you know, have desk.
You run into multiple windows
and, and, you know, multiple
thoughts, applications, and windows. Those
were, those were interesting times
to have to figure out
how to make all of
that work and how to
make still that, you know,
time slicing and, and, you
know, communication layers still run,
even though it was sharing
resources across multiple Cause it
was cooperative multitasking. The desk
view was D E S
Q V I E w.
And that was a quarter
deck product. If I remember
correctly and it was text
mode and I would run
basically these text mode windows,
it smelled a lot like,
like turbo vision, which was
the windowing thing for triple
Pascal. But it was basically
back in the days when
we were drawing windows with
ASCII art and ANSI art,
and I used to run
multiple, I used to run
tweak, computer support BBS, and
I had a desk view
running four lines and wild
cat software in each window.
And then I moved over
to  when I got
my eight megs of Ram.
I had eight megabytes of
Ram. I had more Ram
than in the entire block
combined. I remember hooking up
all my dips, my tiny
memory fields and fields of
dips filling my, my three
86 DX with eight megs
of Ram and then running
. It was a very
amazing feeling to have that
much money Probably using quarter
decks, multiple Ram card at
the time to take you
to extend your memory, right?
Yeah. And then remembering people,
they were, they were kind
of these silly little geek
competitions, as people would try
to optimize their config SIS
and their auto exec bat
and make sure that everything
gets loaded into upper memory.
And there was a tool
called QEM M, which was
the quarter deck man memory
manager that would let you,
and then people would say,
and basically what that would
do is it would reboot
your machine over and over
and over again and try
different scenarios until it found
the one that worked and
kind of playing Tetris with
your memory. And then eventually
people decided that they could
do it better than, than
QA. And so we just
write them all out on
paper and make the decisions
ourselves. And all of this
was in an attempt to
squeeze another line or another
instance of, of Wildcat or
whatever We were running into
what little memory we had.
Yeah. And to think that
people think computers are hard
today. I mean, well, that's
what I think. I think
that some of the old
timers like ourselves that suffered
through the 300 bod days
want to remind the kids
with the 20 megabits per
second optical connection to their
house, what software real suffering
look like. Right. And of
course, as we reminisce about
300 bod, some listener who
worked on punch cards is
saying, Oh, these kids with
their  in their 2,400
baud modems, they don't know
what real suffering is like.
That's right. I'll tell you
a funny story about the
whole Mustang Wildcat stuff is,
is we, we did, you
know, we, we were in
our heyday in the mid
nineties. So we took the
company public in the, in
the early nineties. And we're
a public company created, traded
on NASDAQ and all this
kind of stuff we're flying
high. You know, we're at
the peak of the BBS
news industry and we're having
good times. And, and in
those days the big computer
show this. And once again,
it doesn't fit the course
anymore. It was Comdex. And,
and for many, many years,
every year at Comdex, we
would go and have a
big booth and show off
our BBS technology. And then
it was in 1995 that
we have our booth, we're
showing off our Wildcat stuff,
our Q modem stuff, and
right behind our booth is
a company called Netscape. And
I remember I met the
booth and Jim goes, Hey,
Scott, you need to go
over and look at this
Netscape stuff. And, you know,
for, for those that, you
know, I've only seen Firefox
internet Explorer, you know, Netscape
was the, the starting of
web browsing. And so they
were showing off their first
web browser. And, you know,
I think everybody from our,
our company walked over there
and sat down and saw
this and were like, wow,
Well back then with what
a lot of people don't
realize is, you know, from
at least from my perspective
is, you know, the internet
started, you know, as a
way to connect multiple computers.
And then, you know, was,
was, you know, an early
times, at least to what
I remember was, you know,
email came and then we
sat around a room when,
when the, when we first
got an internet connection at
Mustang and said, okay, now
how do we connect all
of our, you know, with
53,000 Wildcat bulletin board systems
out in the universe verse.
And so our goal was
to figure out ways to
connect all of these, to
actually cut, to create our
first web really of BBS
is where somebody could, you
know, post a message, you
know, using the back then
the Fido technology, we kind
of took it and took
it to the next level
where somebody could post a
message and in Bakersfield for
somebody in Chicago and then
have it route, you know,
through what was it, the
TC TC helped me out
with some of the terms
we use back then, Scott,
but we used it through,
we went through the actual
internet layer to send that
message, to Package it up
and then send it across
to the Chicago BBS for
somebody then locally could dial
in and grab their email.
Hi, it's Scott here from
another place in time. I
hope you're enjoying the show
so far. I apologize for
interrupting it, but I wanted
to let you know that
assembling a podcast like this
every week, isn't free. Certainly
the bandwidth bill crushes us
every month. So I wanted
to let you know that
this show is sponsored by
Tellerik. They make the show
possible and it makes it
pretty cool products as well.
For example, if you're trying
to build a web 2.0
Ajax application, trying to use
the web 1.0 components, it's
kind of difficult. You got
to get the next gen
stuff. If you want to
build the next gen websites.
And that's exactly what the
folks at Tellerik have got
and their new upcoming product,
which is code named rad
controls. Prometheus's a big pack
of web controls built entirely
on top of the Microsoft
ASP net Ajax stuff that
you already understand. It's going
to give you a lot
of performance interactivity on your
next project. They mirror the
ASP net Ajax API. So
the development's really straightforward client
scripture's shared loading time is
pretty fast. You set a
couple of properties. You can
even bind a web services
for really efficient operation. The
new rad editor for ESPN
and Ajax loads up to
four times faster than before.
And the rad grid will
do thousands of records in
milliseconds. But of course, it's
better to try these things
for yourself. So you can
visit  dot com slash
ASP, net Ajax, and download
a trial. Thanks a lot
for listening. And we'll get
right back to the show.
Let's back up a sec,
cause you've mentioned FIDOnet a
couple of times let's talk
about what FIDOnet was for
people who don't necessarily remember
that. Yeah. So if I
don't get the whole point
of FIDOnet was, you know,
back in the, in the
mid eighties, it was very
expensive to make long distance
phone calls. And so your
challenge was let's, let's say
that Scott Hanselman lives in
Portland, Oregon, and Scott Hunter lives
in little rock Arkansas. And
I want to send you
a message. Well, I don't
want to dial into your
BBS in Portland, Oregon, because
that's gonna, you know, that's
going to cost me a
dollar a minute or whatever
the heck it was in
those days. And so the
idea behind FIDOnet was I
can have a message board
on my BBS. It's shared
all the way across the
country. And what happens is
once at once and in
the middle of the night,
two or three o'clock in
the morning, your BVS might
call my BBS. And when
it does my view, my
BBS will basically take all
the messages that you have
not seen, right? Zip them
up and shoot them over
to you. And this is
occurring. There was thousands of
BBS that were doing this
every single night, every single
night, these would be calling
each other and transferring all
their messages back and forth.
And so the benefit for
the, for the end user
was if I was on
your BBS in Portland, I
could send a message to
Scott Hunter. And over a 24
hour period, it would show
up on my BBS in
Arkansas and I could respond
and we would have a
conversation, but it was, you
know, that's something else. You
know, people, people are spoiled
today by, you know, I
sent an email and it
shows up on somebody's desk
and one or two seconds.
And in the mid eighties,
the way that worked is
you, I would send you
an email and it would
show up and, you know,
on your computer in 24
hours, right. We would, we
would, For those of us
that were, were, were children
at the time, in, in
that time, in the late
eighties, I was still a
kid. I would try to
call as far as I
could, without making a long
distance call exact. So for
the cheap, the cheap amongst
us, basically we would call,
we would, we would figure
out what's the farthest East
that I could call. And
for me, I think it
was Walla Walla, Washington. And
I would call a bulletin
board in Walla Walla, which
was the fight on it.
No, that wasn't long distance.
And then we would bounce
ourselves around the country a
little bit at a time
at two in the morning
without actually making a long
distance call. And that was
about the most amazing thing
ever. But these addresses that
we were using were FIDOnet
addresses and we were talking
to FIDOnet forums. So we
weren't quite on the internet
yet. And then in Portland,
the, the big bulletin board
system around Portland, which was
Northwest computer support. And they
were like the 700 pound
gorilla. I actually visited their
offices once. And they had
like 32 modems and a
whole room dedicated to this.
And we, you know, we,
little guy couldn't compete and
they hooked up FIDOnet to
the internet and then started
giving their users for, I
think it was like $5
a month, a free NW
cs.org email address. And they
bridged TCP IP and FIDOnet
and suddenly things got really
interesting. And we were bulletin
board people, which were kind
of like, it was the
alt net we're on the
actual net, which before was
really only college students and
scientists and rich people. Yeah.
Just bring back a lot
of memories. I really do.
And, and what was amazing
was just like you said,
that the, the whole BBS
community figured out a way
to start wiring all these
PBS together without really ever
making a long distance call.
And, but it was, but
it also was the very
first time you could actually
have really message boards that
could have different themes to
them. And then those message
boards could be active worldwide.
And so when you look
at the social aspect of
what, what bolts and board
systems were really doing back,
you know, in, in the,
the mid nineties, you know,
early or late eighties or
early nineties, it's truly amazing
to see, you know, they
really were the first social
network, you know, that at
least that's my opinion. Yeah.
I think that the point
that you made earlier about
how comfortable you were getting
to know these people and
that they, they made you
feel welcomed, and this was
25 years ago and still
computer culture was such that
you could ask questions and
not necessarily feel like a
huge newb because people would
welcome you with open arms
and say, here's somebody trying
to do something cool. Yeah.
And there wasn't really, I
mean, even though there was
people were competing, there was
so many bolts and boards
now that people were starting
to, you know, to compete
in the early nineties and
mid nineties, just, you know,
of natural competition, people wanting
to have a better BBS
and their neighbor. It was
a friendly competition. Most PBS
is when they, when they
met a new, a new
Sasabe would, you know, would
go over to their house
and help them set it
up. I mean, I, I
helped multiple people set up
ultim board systems and, and
you know, my, another, another
guy we brought into the
company, Rick hemming, we met
him because he was running
a, another bulletin board system
product called our, which stood
for remote volts board system.
And he was running that
product and that's how, how
we met. And he ended
up being another partner at
Mustang and, and, you know,
really helped us take the
company to the next level
as well. So, and that
was all because of just
friendships that were made. And,
and then, then the Sasabe
get togethers at Comdex. And,
and then, you know, the
industry started creating its own
user conferences and everything. And,
and it was, it was
an interesting, and, and kind
of a memorable time really
of my life to, to
remember all those folks that
came to those meetings. It
took a dive. So we
did, as I said, we
saw the, we saw the
incoming and in 95, when
we were actually at that
Comdex and we saw Netscape,
I mean, we knew, we
knew at that point, the
world was changing. I mean,
that was, that was the
tip of the iceberg was,
was it that the world
was changing and I don't,
I don't know. And Jim
can correct me if I'm
wrong. I don't think we
realized how big the change
was going to be and
how fast the change was
going to come. But Mustang
software, fortunately, to kind of
do the short end of
the stick is as that
industry started to decline, we
internally looked at ourselves and
said, okay, we know this
is gonna, we see this
declining. Now let's go, let's
go find another niche to
go build an industry in.
And so that initial that
we built, what we did
internally as a company, this
is kind of interesting to
some people, is we basically
a, the company kind of
scaled down after the industry,
the industry started slowing down
and we took our development
team and, and basically just
cut it up into four
pieces and said, here's, we
went in there and, and,
and put four ideas on
a whiteboard and cut the
company in four pieces and
said, we're going to have
a snippet of people work
on each of these four
things. And one of the
four things I got to
give Jim credit for this,
this is, this was his
idea was, you know, as
the internet starting to spin
up and people are getting
online, you know, on the
net. Now email was becoming
a big issue. So let's,
let's say you're a company
and you're, you're, you're selling
your product on the internet.
And imagine how many emails
you must get. So suddenly
you were gone from brick
and mortar to, we have
an online webpage and we're
selling our products on the,
and we're getting a 500
messages an hour via email
asking questions. And, and when
we were, when we were,
when we were supporting wild
cat, at one point, our
support group had, we, we
added an aspect of call
center, which is one of
these call center. Things that
as the, as a, as
the phone call, spin in,
as people are calling for
technical support, we had a
board on the wall that
showed how many people were
in queue, the longest it's
in queue. And Jim came
up with the crazy idea
of doing that for email.
You know, what if a
thousand emails are coming in
an hour, how do you
handle that? How do you
make sure you, your, your
employees answered every one of
those? And so one of
those ideas, one of those
four ideas was a product
called internet message center. And
what it basically did is
they would take your emails
and put them into a
queue. And as soon as
the email came in, it
was sending the user response
back saying, Hey, we've got
your email. Here's a, here's
a ticket number. If you
don't get a response within
24 hours, call back or
email back and give us
your ticket number, and we
can find out where your
request went. And what would
happen on the other end
is, is that the email
would go into a queue.
All the users in the,
in the, in the support
group would run in a
little, little app that on
their, on their desktop that
shows the cues, how many
messages were in the queue.
As soon as they were
done with a message, they
click a button on that
interface. And the next email
comes through onto their desktop.
And all of this is
being tracked and stored and
stuff. So we can, you
know, just like a call
center, redo this, we're doing
this for email. So, you
know, let's say you did
call and say, I haven't
got a response in 24
hours as the admin of
the support group. I could
go look up with that
tracking number and say, okay,
well, the email came into
our email server at three
o'clock in the afternoon, Joe
and John both looked at
it and they have not
sent a response yet. We
could actually see the entire
history of the conversations and
stuff. And so we actually
rebuilt Mustang around this product.
So we didn't actually get
out before, you know, the,
the, the fall of this
industry, but we actually reinvented
the company before that industry,
you know, perished. Right. Yeah.
And kind of winding down
rewinding a little bit. So
in 95, and as Scott
mentioned in November of 95,
we're at condex. And one
of the things our company
always did was instead of
taking our sales and marketing
people to Comdex, I loaded
up all of our programmers
and engineers, because I wanted
them to actually work in
the booth and connect with
the customers. Cause then when
customers would walk up and
go, why do you do
this, this isn't, you know,
this isn't very smart. I
would do it this way.
To me. I was one
of our programmers hearing those
comments and not the sales
and marketing team. So it
was always nice to get
the programmers kind of out
of the office for a
week as well, and, and
let them, you know, kind
of regenerate their, their batteries.
And so when we saw
Netscape, catty-corner chests and conduct
November of 95, I, as
Scott mentioned, I had all
the programmers kind of go
through. And, and the, the
thing that amazed us is,
you know, it wasn't about
the BVS anymore. It wasn't,
it wasn't about, you know,
with DBS is it was
your, you were calling into
a specific location to look
at their content. And what,
what the worldwide web brought
with with, with the, the
browsing technology was really more
about content. It was, it
wasn't about where the content
was located. It was about
the content period, and the
fact that you could put
multiple links of content on
one page and make it,
make it graphical. Even though
the BBS industry was moving
to a more graphical platform
at that time, it was
still, you know, all of
the information was, was on
that particular bulletin board system.
And so, you know, when,
as soon as we noticed
that, Hey, it's not going
to be about the BVS
anymore. It's all you know,
or where the server is
located. It's really about the
content we knew that the
end was going to be
near. We, I don't think
we anticipated that, that within
a year, our entire product
line would be eradicated, which
is, which is Scott, how
quickly it happened. I mean,
we went from being on
top of the world in
November of 95 to, you
know, to ha you know,
having very little, you know,
very few customers in November
of 96, which is when
we started developing these four
products that Scott Hunter just just
mentioned. And so within a
year, we went from having
53,000 bolts and board systems
to probably I'd say under
5,000, it happened that quick
as people migrated to the
worldwide web. Wow, that is
crazy. And I wonder if
there would have been a
way this is all hindsight
is 2020 blogs really hadn't
happened yet, but to, to
have turned Wildcat into a
content management system of, of
the storage to move the
BBS to the web. Well,
we spent 96 kind of
doing that. We came out
with a product called Annihilator,
which was our, our Wildcat,
a bulletin board system that
had it's. We, we, we
acquired a product called Q
modem, which was a communications
product, and we kind of
built our own browser, a
web browser into that platform
that would talk specifically to
Wildcat bulletin board systems. And
so the first thing we,
we try to do, because
we just, you know, we
honestly didn't think the world
wide web would take off
that quickly. We knew we
had 53,000 Wildcat systems out
there, and we knew we
had, you know, hundreds of
thousands of people, if not
millions of people using those
53,000 systems. And so we,
the first thing we try
to do is put a,
you know, a web based
interface into our queue modem
product to connect to these
systems. But the technology was
just starting to evolve so
quickly that, that, you know,
we'd just, it was just
trying to stay above water.
And that the thing that
Scott Hunter and I laugh about
today is when you think
about bulletin board systems, well,
you know, we had chat
in Wildcat and you remember
when people would, would join
into Mo when you had
a multi-user BBS, people would
go into chat. You know,
that was when we saw
aim, come out with American
online instant messaging come out.
We were like, Oh, crap,
we missed that one. You
know, cause we had, we
had instant messaging in Wildcat.
And then, you know, when
Yahoo groups, you know, first
appeared, we were like, Oh
crap, we missed that one.
We had groups in Wildcat,
you know? And so every
turn we were kind of
like, we were like, Oh
man, there's little bits and
pieces of Wildcat being used
on the internet now. And
just, just one little facet
of it and they're, and
they're becoming so popular. And
so it was, it was
kind of an interesting time
for us to sit back
and watch kind of bits
and pieces of Wildcat being,
being redeployed on the internet
as a single application and,
and, and other people were,
were, were benefiting from that.
And we were like, well,
we missed that one. We
missed that one, but you
know, but we did well
with, you know, with internet
message center was, it was
a huge success for us.
So, you know, we got
something right. But there was
a lot of other things
that we of, you know,
kick ourselves about because we'd
created some white papers about,
about deploying some of those
features of, of Wildcat on
the net. And we just
never, it never bubbled up
enough for us to spend
any R and D time.
We actually just said, we
actually talked about taking the
instant messaging out of Wildcat
and making a standalone product
that would have been AOL
messenger or innocent messenger or
ICQ or ICQ. I mean,
we talked, as Jim said,
it was like, like two
or three years in a
row, we were watching all
these, these things phenomenons happen
over the internet. We're like
going God, we did that.
We just never did rip
it out of the BBS
and, and, and ended up
on the internet. And as
Jim said, we actually had
a product called wind server.
It was code name, the
code name for it was
Annihilator, which was actually a
version of Wildcat that had
an HTP server in it.
So it sits or webpages
it, you could tell it
into it. And so, you
know, if once you were
on the internet, you could
actually use Telnet to sign
in and get to get
the old modem interface via
Telnet. We actually even had
an internet client very similar
to what AOL was when
AOL first came out of
a thick line. You know,
you install this client on
your desktop and you get
this application. And, and when
you use this application to
connect to a Wildcat internet
wind server, and when you
do, you know, it looks
just like the AOL does.
So at one point we
actually were going around saying,
Hey, we'll, we'll sell you
a mini AOL because we
have the client and the
server piece. But, you know,
as Jim said that, I
don't know if it was
just because we were so
BVS centric at the time
that each of our solutions
around that area were still
just too tied to the
BBS. We never ripped them
all apart. And as a
result, as a collection, they,
they didn't do well. But,
you know, the, the, as,
as Jim said, and the
story I was telling earlier,
the internet message center stuff
was, was wildly popular. And
that's, that's what eventually led
us out of that space
was, you know, our was
purchased For that product. So
you guys changed your name
from Mustang software to mustang.com,
right? Yes, that's correct. Yeah,
that's correct. That was back
when, you know, we, we
had to kind of reinvent
the company because remember we
were public and all of
a sudden within that 12
month period where the BBS
market just got absolutely just
erratic had to figure out
a way to, to reinvent
the company. And so part
of that was a name
change, and I just could
not let go of, of
the name Mustang. And so,
you know, our board of
directors talked and talked and
we finally just said, let's,
let's go to mustang.com and
let's, let's release our new
web based products underneath that
name and part of our
reinventing the company. And so
that's why we changed the
name. Well, then a couple
of months later, you merged
with Quintess right. And then
that got bought by Avaya.
Is there anything left of
Mustang software? Yeah, I know
that the, the, some of
the code is being used
in vias contact management application.
So, you know, the reason
why they bought us is,
is they had call center
technology already. They had fax
inbound fax technology to manage
that in the call center.
They just didn't have the
email piece. So now, you
know, they can have one
person sitting at a console
and a phone call comes
in, you know, the phone
is delivered to their headset
and a screen pop, you
know, with the user's total
account information is in front
of them. Or if an
email pops in, you know,
like the, you know, sales@nordstrom.com,
then the same thing it's,
you know, that message is,
you know, pops on their
screen. Their phone is automatically
put in a busy state
and they're, you know, they're
measured on how quickly they
can answer that email. And
there's a database of answers.
We built a natural language
engine that would automatically read
and scan the message and
then pop up paragraphs so
that the agent could just
drag and drop right into
those reply messages. So, so
now a person using the
Avaya contact center can, can
handle a phone, a fax
and email coming into that,
that contact center. Hmm it's
it's it must be, it
must be strange to look
back and, and have it
be gone. I mean, I
still kind of miss PBS
is a little bit, and
then, you know, I don't
know, it's almost like it
was all a dream if
that's kind of a funny
way to mention it though,
but I mean, it was,
it was a five or
10 year period there where
as a user of a
BBS, whereas as a resume
person that ran a BVS,
it was just like, we
thought that was the pinnacle,
you know, it was just
going to get better and
better. I definitely didn't see
the internet coming in in
any way. The part that
I miss the most about
it, and I don't know
why is the internet different?
It might just be because
there's more people on it
was, you know, I remember
in 85 when we ran
into DBS, especially early in
the BBS, BBS has got
a little darker, I should
say, as time went on,
it was amazing just how
nice people were, how Nice
the community was. You know,
you look at the, you
look at the websites today
and, and the blogs and
the, and the comments and
stuff and, and the negativity
and, and stuff like that.
And, you know, God, in
1985, if you went somewhere,
nobody would call you stupid.
Nobody said you were dumb
for running something. You know,
how can I help you
I'll come to your house
and help. It was just,
it was a different time.
That's the part of it
that I missed the, The
whole concept of flames and
flaming and, and, you know,
which is when you're being
negative to somebody on a
message board really didn't start
till about 91. That's when
that whole concept of flames
and, and people started getting
used to using real anonymous
names and hiding behind these
anonymous names. And I think
you're right, Scott, it, it,
before that period of time,
it was, it was more
of just, you know, full
disclosure and being in, and
really just being helpful because,
you know, you had back
then had to be really
kind of a, you know,
an expert in their own
mind. And there was really,
you know, besides the books
that we all bought, you
know, there, that was the
only other resource was to
get on these Bolton board
systems and ask questions, you
know, to figure out how
to write those, how to,
how to edit those config
files and how to use
dot, you know, how to
use Edlund to edit your,
your dos files and, and,
you know, it was, it
was, it was a different
time and, you know, teaching
people how to use these,
how to go in and
create automated batch files and
stuff was, was, you know,
just, it was just a
different time as Scott said,
Yeah, I miss it. That's
what I'm, I don't know
about to Scott Hanselman, but
I that's what I miss
the most about. It was
just the innocence of it
and how friendly people were.
And, and, you know, as
you know, it didn't matter
if you were in a
dr. Dos or dos or
stacker, which, you know, various
products of that era, nobody
cared. I mean, it was
just about the community. Well,
there's the slowness of things
right now. I'm finding that
the urgency addiction of the
internet is a problem in
the sense of, if I
can't get an answer in
20 minutes, then I start
getting pretty upset. But, you
know, back in the day,
you'd leave a message on
copy server up on a
bulletin board, and you'd sit
around for three or four
days and you'd wonder if
it was going to get
answered. And that was okay.
That could be part of
it. You know, that's, that's,
that's a great point, you
know, today it's so instant,
you know, back in those
days, when you responded to
somebody, you didn't try to
respond, you know, really quickly
anyways. But if a message
came to me, I'm not
going to go, you guys
need to respond to this
in the next 10 minutes,
because the reality is it's
going to take a day
to get to them. So,
you know, I think if
you thought more about the
response and it was a
great industry, and I, like
you said, I still can't
think that, you know, gosh,
it's only been gone for
what, 15 years now, or
something like that. I mean,
it was amazing how fast
that industry blew up and
then how fast it went
away. And it wasn't that
long ago, It took us
nine years, you know, really
from, from, you know, when
you think about, you know,
87 to 96, it was,
it was, it was nine
years of, of really just
being focused and trying to
drive that until we really
had to start, you know,
really totally switching and into
another, another gear with the,
with the internet. So I'm
just glad that, you know,
I was a part of
it. I was glad that,
you know, there's a lot
of other people that were
part of it. There was
a leather BBS products that,
that, that challenged us to,
to take it to the
next level there, you know,
and, you know, I, I
miss some of those guys
that I competed with back
then, the Scott Brinker's of
the world, you know, cause
they really pushed us to
be, to be the best
we possibly could. And our
customers were so loyal. I
mean, you know, when somebody
are running a Wildcat BBS,
they, they, you know, they
really evangelize our product to,
to their friends and help,
help friends set up their
own BBS and, you know,
piracy really wasn't a big
problem for us cause people
were proud of, of running
it and you know, it
was a, it was just
a, you know, it's just,
I just think it was
great to be part of
that era and I'm really
happy that I was able
to, to participate in it.
Yeah. That was the other
thing about, you know, when
I talk about the community
and stuff in those days,
I mean our big competitors
where we had there was
there was PC board, there
was major BBS, which is
the one by Tim striker
that Jim was mentioning, there
was a , which was,
which was PBS. We, we
compete very heavily with all
these guys, but at the
same time, you know, we
would go have a beer
with them as well. I
mean, we show up for
a BBS convention and it
was not uncommon to go
to dinner and have a
beer with all those guys.
So, you know, even, even
the, the companies that were
fighting in the trenches, in
the, in those, in that
space where we're pretty friendly,
well, people can, can go
up to Wikipedia and look
for Mustang software. And at
the very bottom of the
Wikipedia article on Mustang, there's
an external link to a
book it's a 57 Meg
PDF called the history of
Mustang that has a lot
of the detail that we've
talked about. And a lot
of stories and pictures and
information that people who are
interested in BVS culture should
definitely check out. And then
people should also search the
internet for the, the BBS
documentary, which is kind of
the legendary documentary, describing all
things bulletin board and like
these basically someone wandered around
for a year or two
interviewing people from bulletin boards
all over. Did you guys,
are you guys in that
document? Some of our employees
where I was traveling when
they came by, but a
lot of our, they came
to the Mustang campus and
sat on the couch with
several of our, our engineers
and, and, and actually interviewed
them. So there's some great
clips of, of those folks
in there. Very cool people
can see that@pbsdocumentary.com, there's definitely
two or three of our
engineers that were involved in
that documentary. You can see
that@bbsdocumentary.com or search for BBS
documentary on Google video, and
that's been released as creative
common. So you can see
it in multiple parts up
on, up online, or get
a DVD Set. And then
both of you guys are
on Twitter now, the new
BBS. So I'll put links
to your Twitter names as
well. Great. Well, we'd love
to love to hear from
people that were ever ran
a bulletin board systems, be
sure to send us a
message and I'll look him
speak up so we can
see it and bring back
some more memories. No, we
should do. We should make
a, we should make a
Facebook group for users, users
in CIS ops of wild
cat software. You should set
that up, Jim. Yeah, I'll
do that. Alright. Well, thanks
so much to her and
Scott Hunter for sitting down and
talking about bulletin boards and
Mustang software. We appreciate all
the work that you guys
did to keep us connected
to even 25 years ago.
It's our pleasure and thanks
for having us on today.
Thanks God. Another episode of
Hansel minutes, and I'll see
you again next week.